Lyme borreliosis is a tick-borne disease that predominantly occurs in temperate regions of the northern hemisphere and is primarily caused by the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi in North America and Borrelia afzelii or Borrelia garinii in Europe and Asia. Infection usually begins with an expanding skin lesion, known as erythema migrans (referred to as stage 1), which, if untreated, can be followed by early disseminated infection, particularly neurological abnormalities (stage 2), and by late infection, especially arthritis in North America or acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans in Europe (stage 3). However, the disease can present with any of these manifestations. During infection, the bacteria migrate through the host tissues, adhere to certain cells and can evade immune clearance. Yet, these organisms are eventually killed by both innate and adaptive immune responses and most inflammatory manifestations of the infection resolve. Except for patients with erythema migrans, Lyme borreliosis is diagnosed based on a characteristic clinical constellation of signs and symptoms with serological confirmation of infection. All manifestations of the infection can usually be treated with appropriate antibiotic regimens, but the disease can be followed by post-infectious sequelae in some patients. Prevention of Lyme borreliosis primarily involves the avoidance of tick bites by personal protective measures.

Lyme borreliosis is an important emerging infectious disease1,2 that is commonly reported in North America and Europe, but is also found in parts of Asia3. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that ~300,000 new cases of the disease occur annually in the United States, primarily in northeastern states4.

Lyme arthritis was recognized in 1976 because of geographical clustering of children with arthritis in Lyme, Connecticut in the United States5. Following this report, Lyme arthritis was revealed to be part of a complicated multisystem illness, which included erythema migrans (a slowly expanding skin lesion), Bannwarth syndrome and acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, which had been described in Europe1. These syndromes were brought together following the isolation of Borrelia burgdorferi, a spirochaete, from Ixodes scapularis (also known as Ixodes dammini ticks)6. In addition, B. burgdorferi was recovered from patients with these clinical manifestations of the infection1, and the disease, commonly affecting the skin, joints, heart or nervous system, is now referred to as Lyme borreliosis.

B. burgdorferi sensu lato (B. burgdorferi s.l.; that is, B. burgdorferi in the general sense) now comprises 20 different genospecies3. Three genospecies of B. burgdorferi s.l. are primarily responsible for human Lyme borreliosis: B. burgdorferi, Borrelia afzelii and Borrelia garinii7. These genospecies are transmitted by different species of ticks and are responsible for Lyme borreliosis in different geographical regions, for example, B. burgdorferi sensu stricto (that is, B. burgdorferi in the strict sense) is the primary cause of Lyme borreliosis in the United States, whereas B. afzelii and B. garini (and less often B. burgdorferi) cause Lyme borreliosis in Europe. The heterogeneity among B. burgdorferi s.l. strains seems to be the main factor causing the regional differences in the clinical expression of human Lyme borreliosis8. For example, B. burgdorferi in the northeastern United States is particularly arthritogenic, B. afzelii primarily causes skin infections and B. garinii is especially neurotropic2.

In this Primer, we detail the epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, prevention, management and post-treatment sequelae of the infection. Moreover, we provide an outlook for improved diagnostics, treatment studies, tick control and vaccination for this complex, tick-transmitted illness.

Go to:
Epidemiology
In the United States, the age distribution of Lyme borreliosis is typically bimodal, with peaks among children 5–15 years of age and adults 45–55 years of age3,9 (FIG. 1a). The incidence of Lyme borreliosis is higher among men than among women in those <60 years of age, but the sex ratio is nearly equal or slightly higher in women in older age groups. In some European countries, such as Slovenia and Germany, the incidence of Lyme borreliosis is higher among adult women (55%) than among men (45%)9–11. In the northeastern United States and in most of Europe, the peak months of disease onset are June and July, which is owing to the feeding habits of nymphal ticks (FIG. 1b).
Tick vectors and animal hosts
Worldwide, four tick species belonging to the Ixodes ricinus complex are major vectors for the transmission of B. burgdorferi s.l. to humans12 (FIG. 2). The natural enzootic cycles of B. burgdorferi s.l. are complex and vary by geographical location. In the northeastern United States, transmission of B. burgdorferi occurs from some rodents, particularly white-footed mice and chipmunks, to larval and nymphal I. scapularis13. The fact that the larval and nymphal stages of the tick feed on the same animal is essential, as the life cycle of the spirochaete depends on horizontal transmission from infected nymphs to rodents in early summer and from infected rodents to larvae in late summer, which then moult to infected nymphs to begin the cycle the following year14. White-tailed deer, which are not involved in the life cycle of the spirochaete, are the primary host of adult I. scapularis and, as such, are the primary site of tick mating, and, therefore, are important for the maintenance of tick populations15. In Europe, I. ricinus feed on >300 animal species, including large and small mammals, birds and reptiles16. Birds are an important reservoir for B. garinii, whereas rodents are an important reservoir for B. afzelii. Migratory birds might have a role in expanding the range of ticks to new areas12, as has been observed in central and eastern Canada17.

Distribution and incidence
Lyme borreliosis has been reported in countries throughout the northern hemisphere. In Europe and Asia, the reported country-wide incidence ranges from low to negligible in the United Kingdom, Turkey and Japan, to >80 cases per 100,000 individuals in the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Slovenia, Lithuania and Estonia10,18. Data on the incidence of Lyme borreliosis are scarce from Asia, although cases have been reported in, for example, China and Mongolia19. In North America, >90% of cases are reported from two regions in the United States: the northeast and mid-Atlantic region and the north-central region9,12,20. Both regions have expanded substantially over the past 20 years20 and have reached the southern parts of Canada21. Pockets of intense transmission of B. burgdorferi can exist within smaller, well-defined areas and in individuals who are at high risk for tick bites, such as hikers or forestery workers9,11. In a trial investigating a Lyme disease vaccine that was conducted in such areas of the northeastern United States, the yearly incidence of B. burgdorferi was >1 per 100 participants in the placebo group22.

Risk factors
Within an endemic area, the risk of human infection by B. burgdorferi s.l. is determined by the local abundance and infection rate of vector ticks and by human behaviours that affect the likelihood of being bitten. Occupations and hobbies that increase tick exposure (for example, forestry workers, hunters and hikers) are associated with an increased risk of infection20,23,24. Where homes are situated in tick-infested areas, exposure occurs primarily in the peridomestic environment that is influenced by the amount of suitable tick habitat, the density of ticks and deer, landscaping practices that promote tick survival and the undertaking of outdoor activities, such as gardening25. Infection through alternate modes of transmission, including blood transfusion, sexual contact, semen, urine or breast milk, has not been demonstrated.

Go to:
Mechanisms/pathophysiology
Most mechanistic studies of B. burgdorferi s.l. have been carried out in mouse models using strains of B. burgdorferi that are found in the United States. However, several caveats are associated with the translation of findings in mouse models to human Lyme borreliosis. First, although B. burgdorferi infection shows a reproducible temporal progression in mice as the organism disseminates from the inoculation site, disease in inbred strains of mice does not closely mimic human Lyme borreliosis. Second, the pathogenic characteristics of B. burgdorferi might not be identical for all of the genospecies that cause Lyme borreliosis. Thus, except for instances in which a given characteristic is known to apply to all B. burgdorferi s.l. genospecies, we use the term B. burgdorferi throughout this section and we do not equate pathological characteristics with a stage of the human disease, unless we are reporting features of the human infection.

B. burgdorferi cellular architecture
Like all spirochaetes, members of the B. burgdorferi s.l. complex are bound by an inner cytoplasmic membrane and an outer membrane. The defining characteristic of B. burgdorferi s.l. is periplasmic flagella, which are responsible for the flat-wave morphology of the bacteria. The flagella are attached to each cell pole and wind around the cell cylinder in the periplasmic space between the peptidoglycan layer and the outer membrane26 (FIG. 3a,b). Flagellar motors are located at the cell poles and are situated next to the methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins that direct movement of the bacteria towards chemoattractants (for example, nutrients such as rabbit serum and N-acetylglucosamine) and away from repellants (for example, ethanol and butanol)27–29.
B. burgdorferi differs considerably from typical Gram-negative bacteria. Notably, the outer membrane lacks lipopolysaccharide and consists of a lipid bilayer that is composed of phospholipids and glycolipids30 (FIG. 3c). Cholesterol glycolipids in the outer membrane form lipid-raft-like microdomains that change in order and size in response to temperature, which is an important environmental cue for B. burgdorferi during transmission between the tick vector and the mammalian host31. The B. burgdorferi outer membrane also contains surface lipoproteins, which can change depending on the environment. For example, outer-surface protein A (OspA) is expressed during tick colonization and OspC is expressed during early infection of the mammal32–34.

B. burgdorferi genome and metabolism
All genospecies of the B. burgdorferi s.l. complex have small, highly segmented genomes. The 1.5 million-base genome of B. burgdorferi strain B31 consists of a linear chromosome of 910 kilobases, 9 linear plasmids and 12 circular plasmids of various sizes35,36. The linear chromosome is highly conserved among B. burgdorferi s.l. genospecies, whereas the plasmids show a high degree of variation. Although sequence data on plasmids are often incomplete, available data indicate that some plasmids in B. burgdorferi are missing in B. afzelii and B. garinii. Differences in plasmids among B. burgdorferi s.l. are thought to contribute to the clinical variability in Lyme borreliosis in different geographical regions.

Intraspecies diversity has also been noted for several B. burgdorferi s.l. genospecies8. For example, in the United States, B. burgdorferi strains have been divided into several subtypes8 based on variations in the genes that encode OspC, 16S–23S rRNA intergenic spacer region or eight selected housekeeping genes. This sub-typing has been used to correlate the strain variation with the risk for haematogenous dissemination and clinical outcome37–39.

B. burgdorferi has a very limited metabolic capacity and is highly dependent on its tick vector and vertebrate host for many essential factors. For example, B. burgdorferi lacks genes encoding proteins that have a role in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, and relies exclusively on glycolysis for energy production. For this purpose, B. burgdorferi uses several host or vector-derived carbohydrates, including glucose, glycerol, maltose, N-acetylglucosamine, trehalose and chitobiose40. The B. burgdorferi genome also lacks genes that are required for the synthesis of amino acids, lipids, nucleotides and cofactors; to obtain these factors, the B. burgdorferi genome encodes 16 distinct membrane transporters, many of which have broad substrate specificity35. Owing to the inability of B. burgdorferi to synthesize fatty acids, its lipid composition reflects that of the host tissues41; B. burgdorferi exchanges lipids with the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells, either through direct contact or via outer membrane vesicles42.

Invasion, dissemination and immune evasion
B. burgdorferi uses differential gene expression for survival in the different environments of the tick vector and the mammalian host. After tick attachment to the host, cues from tick engorgement (that is, the process of a tick taking a blood meal), such as increases in temperature, the availability of nutrients, changes in oxygen tension and decreased pH, stimulate B. burgdorferi in the tick midgut to undergo transformation from a state that is adapted for tick colonization to one that is primed for infection of the mammal. This transformation requires a complex regulatory network that includes but is not limited to the expression of the RNA polymerase alternative σ-factor RpoS and Borrelia oxidative stress regulator (BosR)32,33 (FIG. 3c). A large number of genes that are targeted by RpoS and BosR encode surface lipoproteins, and RpoS and BosR act in concert to promote the adaptation of B. burgdorferi to the mammalian host through transcriptional activation of mammalian-phase-specific genes (for example, ospC) by RpoS43 and transcriptional repression of the tick-phase-specific genes (for example, ospA) by BosR44. Replacing OspA (a tick midgut adhesin45) with OspC is crucial for establishing early infection in the mammal33,46.

The establishment of B. burgdorferi infection in the host is substantially aided by the tick in both mechanical and biochemical ways. Mechanically, the penetration of the host’s skin by the tick enables the delivery of B. burgdorferi deep into the dermis, near the blood vessels. Biochemically, tick salivary proteins help B. burgdorferi establish an infection by modulating host activities, such as coagulation, fibrinolysis and the immune response47. One of the mechanisms by which OspC enhances bacterial colonization of a mammalian host is through direct recruitment of the tick salivary protein Salp15, a molecule with immunosuppressive properties, to the bacterial surface48. After being deposited in the skin, B. burgdorferi usually multiplies locally before spreading through tissues and into the blood or lymphatic system, which facilitates migration to distant sites. Motility (generated by the flagella) and adherence to host molecules (mediated by the surface lipoproteins) are key to B. burgdorferi moving through the host’s blood and tissues and evading immune responses. Mutant bacteria that have defects in motility or chemotaxis fail to disseminate and are quickly cleared from the inoculation site26.

Many of the mammalian-phase-specific surface lipoproteins can directly interact with several host macromolecules, including plasminogen, complement regulatory proteins and components of the extracellular matrix, such as fibronectin, collagen, laminin and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)49,50. These interactions are thought to have distinct functions, such as plasminogen for proteolysis of tissues, extracellular matrix molecules for adhesion and complement regulatory proteins for immune evasion. However, there is a high degree of functional redundancy among these B. burgdorferi lipoproteins, which makes it difficult to ascertain the in vivo significance of each protein. An exception is the fibronectin-binding protein BBK32, in which unique and sequential roles are assigned to the fibronectin-binding and GAG-binding domains in the interaction of B. burgdorferi with the host vasculature51. BBK32– fibronectin binding initiates the ‘tethering’ of circulating B. burgdorferi to the vascular surface and BBK32–GAG binding contributes to a more-stable vascular interaction, after which B. burgdorferi transmigrates across the endothelium and disseminates into tissues.

B. burgdorferi uses several strategies for evading the host innate and adaptive immune systems. Several B. burgdorferi lipoproteins, which are known collectively as complement regulator-acquiring surface proteins (CRASPs), can bind to host factor H, factor H-like protein and factor H-related proteins52,53, which prevents complement-mediated killing of the bacteria in vitro52,53. After the establishment of infection, the evasion of bactericidal antibodies becomes crucial for the survival of the bacteria. For this purpose, B. burgdorferi again alters the lipoproteins that are expressed on its outer surface, by replacing OspC with VlsE. On the basis of structural similarities between OspC and VlsE, these two proteins might serve a similar physiological function. However, unlike OspC, VlsE undergoes extensive antigenic variation to evade the host immune response54. Millions of vlsE alleles can be generated through gene conversion, which occurs when segments of the 15 silent vls loci are assembled into the vlsE locus in random combinations. The highly variable segments of VlsE are located in a ‘dome’ region that is distal to the lipid anchor and exposed on the cell surface. B. burgdorferi can evade host antibodies to one VlsE variant by expressing a different one on the surface (FIG. 3c). Mutants that express non-variable VlsE are unable to reinfect animals that have been previously infected with B. burgdorferi, whereas bacteria that express variable VlsE can55.

The host immune response
Despite the expression of CRASPs and the antigenic variation of B. burgdorferi surface lipoproteins that enable the bacteria to evade host immune defences, B. burgdorferi is still recognized and killed by both innate and adaptive immune responses. As B. burgdorferi does not produce toxins or extracellular matrix-degrading proteases, most of the manifestations of human Lyme borreliosis at each of the three stages of disease result from inflammation generated by these immune responses.

In stage 1 (in humans, this is typically an expanding skin lesion known as erythema migrans), biopsies that are taken during the first days of infection show papillary dermal oedema and a mixed infiltrate that consists predominantly of T cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells and monocytes or macrophages56. Cytokine expression during this stage is predominantly pro-inflammatory and includes increased levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF), IL-2, IL-6 and type I interferons (IFNs)57–59. The levels of chemokines that attract neutrophils (such as CXC-chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1; also known as growth-regulated-α protein)), macrophages (such as CC-chemokine ligand 3 (CCL3) and CCL4) and T cells (such as CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11) are also increased in erythema migrans lesions60. In both animal and human studies, neutrophils, which are highly effective at killing B. burgdorferi, are notably absent as the erythema migrans rash progresses past 24 hours, whereas T cells, dendritic cells and monocytes remain59,61. In animals that artificially express increased levels of the neutrophil chemoattractant KC, B. burgdorferi is rapidly cleared following incoculation to the dermis, which suggests that the disappearance of neutrophils is important for permitting the establishment of the infection62. Complement also plays an early part in controlling the infection, probably by augmenting phagocytosis and opsonization through the classical pathway. As erythema migrans lesions evolve over days, they progress to dense perivascular and interstitial infiltrates that consist of lymphocytes, plasma cells and occasionally mast cells56. The anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 can be found in these lesions and higher levels of IL-10 have been associated with fewer systemic symptoms of Lyme borreliosis57,63. In animals, IL-10 deficiency is associated with increased inflammation and decreased numbers of B. burgdorferi64, suggesting that, although IL-10 induction might lead to less inflammation and tissue damage, this might enable B. burgdorferi to escape the immune system.

Much of the initial host inflammatory response seems to be mediated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are detected by pattern recognition receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the cytosolic nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein (NOD)-like receptors (FIG. 4). Different TLRs can recognize different PAMPs of B. burgdorferi, including but not limited to lipoproteins (detected by TLR1 and TLR2)65–67, flagellin (detected by TLR5)68, RNA (detected by TLR7 and TLR8)69,70 and CpG sites in DNA (detected by TLR9)68,69. However, responses to B. burgdorferi lipoproteins seem to be the main stimulus causing induction of host enzymes that result in the digestion of extracellular matrix proteins, allowing bacteria to move within tissues and the release of inflammatory cytokines, which leads to the symptoms of Lyme borreliosis71. Studies of knockout mice have shown a role for some TLRs and adaptors (including TLR2 (REF. 72) and the myeloid differentiation primary response protein MYD88 (REFS 73–75)), but not all76–78, in control of the infection.

Although deficiencies in TLRs or their adaptors can result in reduced induction of inflammatory cytokines upon exposure to B. burgdorferi in vitro, a deficiency in one TLR or adaptor does not diminish inflammation during infection in animals, and might even result in increased inflammation, as observed in mice deficient in the TLR components TLR2, MYD88, TIR domain-containing adapter molecule 1 (TRIF) or CD14 (REFS 66,67,73,76). This finding suggests that there is redundancy in the ability of the innate immune system to recognize B. burgdorferi and/or that these components can activate pathways that produce anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-10. During later stages of infection — namely, stage 2 (in humans known as early disseminated infection that is manifested by inflammation at multiple sites) and stage 3 (in humans known as late infection, typically involving arthritis in the United States) — the anti-inflammatory effects might be the more important function of TLR signalling79,80. In human Lyme arthritis, a polymorphism in TLR1 (which results in decreased expression of TLR1) is associated with increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and persistent arthritis after antibiotic therapy39. This high level of cytokines parallels the phenotype of untreated innate immune-deficient mice, but mice do not develop persistent arthritis after antibiotic therapy. This phenotype might result from persistent stimulation from residual TLR ligands, either pathogen or host-derived, leading to continued receptor activation.

As the organism disseminates from the original inoculation site, the pattern of recruitment of inflammatory cells, the release of cytokines and inflammation continue at the sites where the bacteria localize, including the heart, joints and nervous system. All affected tissues show mononuclear cell infiltrates, particularly CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and vascular abnormalities, suggesting that spirochaetes were located in or around blood vessels81. In animal models, differences in the inflammatory infiltrates at different sites of infection, as well as at different stages of the disease, have been observed82. For example, macrophages are abundant in cardiac lesions, but B cells and plasma cells are plentiful in synovial lesions. In stage 3, synovial lesions in patients with antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis show synovial cell hypertrophy, vascular proliferation and sometimes obliterative microvascular lesions, in addition to mononuclear cell infiltrates, which primarily consist of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and macrophages, often with large numbers of plasma cells83.

In in vitro studies, phagocytic cells, including macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, dendritic cells and microglia, can effectively kill B. burgdorferi. Both γδ T cells and natural killer T cells (NKT cells) are recruited quickly to sites where bacteria are present and seem to be involved in modulating antibody responses to the bacteria. The diacylglycerol glycolipid in the outer membrane of the spirochaete can directly activate invariant NKT cells, which have an important role in controlling infection and augmenting phagocytosis84.

B cells are crucial for the control of infection. In the spleen, marginal zone B cells produce antibodies to T cell-independent antigens and are a source of B. burgdorferi-specific IgM antibodies during stage 1 of the disease85. Subsequent development of B. burgdorferi-specific IgG antibodies is correlated with a reduction in spirochaetal numbers in mice, and passively administered IgG antibodies can prevent the establishment of infection in animal models33. Probably owing to variability of proteins among strains of B. burgdorferi, many antibodies against specific proteins are only able to prevent infection in isogenic strains.

Within several weeks to months, innate and adaptive immune mechanisms can reduce bacterial numbers such that, even without antibiotic treatment, the systemic symptoms of Lyme borreliosis wane. Spirochaetes might survive in localized niches in untreated patients for several more years, which can cause persistent symptoms in some cases. However, in humans, all of the inflammatory manifestations of disease, with the possible exception of acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, resolve eventually, even without antibiotic therapy. Wild-life reservoirs of B. burgdorferi, such as mice, do not develop any pathology related to the infection, despite lifelong persistence of the bacteria. This finding suggests that their immune systems have evolved to ‘ignore’ the presence of the organism, which, because the bacteria do not produce toxins or degradative factors, poses less of a threat than continued activation of the immune system. In humans, who are not reservoir hosts, the bacteria, although able to escape killing in localized niches for months or years, are more-efficiently cleared.

Go to:
Diagnosis, screening and prevention
Except for erythema migrans, which is usually diagnosed clinically, the other manifestations of Lyme borreliosis are typically diagnosed by recognition of characteristic clinical signs and symptoms along with serological testing2. Without antibiotic therapy, the clinical manifestations of the disease typically occur in three stages, beginning with early localized infection of the skin and ending with late infection, most commonly Lyme arthritis in the United States or acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans in Europe.

Clinical manifestations
In all parts of the world with endemic Lyme borreliosis, the infection typically begins during summer with erythema migrans (stage 1), which occurs at the site of the tick bite (FIG. 5). In the United States, where the infection is caused by B. burgdorferi, erythema migrans is often accompanied by malaise, fatigue, headache, arthralgias, myalgias, fever and regional lymphadenopathy86. In addition, erythema migrans is the presenting manifestation of Lyme borreliosis in ~80% of patients in the United States; ~18% of patients have nonspecific symptoms during summer without recognition of erythema migrans and the remaining 2–3% present with a manifestation of early or late disseminated infection, such as facial palsy, trigeminal neuropathy or Lyme arthritis87. Even without antibiotic therapy, erythema migrans typically improves or resolves within weeks.

In Europe, erythema migrans caused by any of the B. burgdorferi s.l. genospecies expands slower than that evident in cases in the United States and is not usually accompanied by other symptoms. Interestingly, the clinical features of B. burgdorferi infection in Europe more closely resemble that of infection with B. afzelii or B. garinii, which share the same ecological niche, than the clinical features of B. burgdorferi infection in the United States88. Although B. garinii infection also begins in most cases as a solitary skin lesion, itching and burning symptoms within the lesion are more common and local spreading is faster than with B. afzelii or B. burgdorferi infection in Europe89,90. A rare skin manifestation of early Lyme borreliosis in Europe is borrelial lymphocytoma, which is typically located on the earlobe in children or on the nipple in adults (FIG. 5b) and is most often caused by B. afzelii infection91.

Early disseminated infection Within days to weeks, the strains of B. burgdorferi in the United States commonly disseminate from the site of the tick bite to other regions of the body. B. burgdorferi can spread to other skin sites, causing multiple erythema migrans lesions, or to other organs, particularly to the peripheral and/or central nervous system (CNS), heart or joints2 (FIG. 6). B. afzelii does not disseminate as often as B. burgdorferi, but can persist at skin sites, for months or years, either at the site of the previous tick bite or at other sites, whereas B. garinii is particularly neurotropic and may cause both peripheral nervous system (radiculoneuritis, that is, inflammation of the spinal nerve root) and CNS (meningitis) abnormalities.
During early disseminated infection (stage 2), patients might develop acute Lyme neuroborreliosis1. In the United States, the most common clinical features of Lyme neuroborreliosis are lymphocytic meningitis with episodic headaches and mild neck stiffness, cranial neuropathy (particularly facial palsy), or motor or sensory radiculoneuritis92. Rarely, patients might have cerebellar ataxia or encephalomyelitis92. Electrophysiological studies of peripheral nerve lesions in affected extremities (that is, the extremities that are innervated by branches of the spinal nerve with radiculo neuritis) suggest primarily axonal nerve involvement92,93. Histologically, these lesions show axonal injury with perivascular infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells around epineural blood vessels93.

In Europe, B. garinii infection causes a type of neurological involvement, called Bannwarth syndrome or tick-borne meningopolyneuritis94. Bannwarth syndrome begins with painful radiculoneuritis that is associated with lymphocytic meningitis, often without headache, and can be followed by cranial neuropathy or pareses of the extremities95. B. afzelii can also cause neuro logical involvement, but the clinical manifestations are not as clear as with B. garinii96. Of 10 patients in whom B. afzelii was isolated from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), only one fulfilled criteria for confirmed Lyme neuro borreliosis, which is defined as an objective neurological deficit accompanied by CSF pleocytosis and intrathecal antibody production to B. burgdorferi s.l. (REF. 96). In the other nine patients, clinical symptoms of CNS involvement were often vague, primarily consisting of headache, dizziness, concentration and memory disturbances and paresthesias; only two of these patients had CSF pleocytosis. Even without antibiotic therapy, acute Lyme neuroborreliosis usually improves or resolves within months97.

Acute cardiac involvement can also occur during early disseminated infection and mostly manifests as fluctuating degrees of atrioventricular nodal block, in which electrical impulses from the atria are interrupted before conduction to the ventricles. Other, less common, manifestations include acute myopericarditis or mild left ventricular dysfunction and, rarely, cardiomegaly or pancarditis1. Acute carditis usually resolves within weeks, even without antibiotic therapy. However, fatal cases have been reported98. In Europe, the spirochaete was isolated from endomyocardial biopsy samples of a patient with chronic dilated cardiomyopathy99.

Late infection The late, stage 3 manifestations of Lyme borreliosis in the United States diverge from those in Europe even more than the early-stage manifestations (FIG. 6). In an initial study, carried out before the cause of the disease was known, ~60% of patients with erythema migrans who were not treated with antibiotics in the northeastern United States developed arthritis an average of 6 months (range: 4 days to 2 years) later100. Joint swelling and pain typically occurred in intermittent attacks primarily in large joints, especially the knee, over a period of several years, but some patients had persistent synovitis for 4–5 years. Lyme arthritis usually resolves following appropriate oral or intravenous antibiotic therapy101. However, some patients have persistent, proliferative synovitis for months to several years, which is termed post-infectious, antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis102. In Europe, Lyme borreliosis can also cause arthritis, usually in one or a few large joints, but this occurs less frequently and earlier in the disease course than in the United States. In one study from Germany, the mean period from erythema migrans to the onset of arthritis was 3 months (range: 10 days to 16 months)103. In addition, chronic arthritis occurs rarely in Europe.
In Europe, acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans — a slowly progressive lesion that is located primarily on the extensor (acral) surfaces of the extremities — is the most frequent late manifestation of Lyme borreliosis and is more common in older women, for unclear reasons, and is rare in children91,104 (FIGS 5,​,6).6). About 20% of patients with acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans have a history that is consistent with a preceding spontaneously healed erythema migrans lesion, usually on an extremity where the acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans lesion developed 6 months to 8 years later105. Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans results primarily from B. afzelii infection, although it can also be caused by B. garinii or European B. burgdorferi infections106 and starts with an inflammatory phase that is followed by an atrophic phase, sometimes with features. The bacteria have been isolated from acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans lesions >20 years after its first appearance. Peripheral neuropathy and joint involvement can occur within the skin sites affected with acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans lesions.

Several rare neurological manifestations have also been associated with B. burgdorferi s.l. infection. In Europe, a severe neurological syndrome of chronic encephalomyelitis that is characterized by spastic paraparesis, cranial neuropathy or cognitive impairment has been described94. Stroke-like signs and symptoms in patients with Lyme borreliosis have been reported in both the United States and Europe107. In the United States, a mild, late encephalopathy that manifests primarily as subtle cognitive disturbances108 and/or a mild sensory polyneuropathy have been reported to occur109. However, the existence of these neurological syndromes is controversial and how much of the disease is due to active infection, post-infectious immune phenomena or other factors is not always clear.

Diagnostic tests
Demonstration of borrelial infection by laboratory testing is required for reliable diagnosis of Lyme borreliosis, with the exception of erythema migrans1,2,97,110. The culture of Borrelia spp. from patient specimens enables definitive diagnosis, but is generally restricted almost exclusively to research studies because of the need for special expertise and equipment. Moreover, except for patients with acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans104, positive cultures have been obtained only during the first weeks of infection, primarily from skin biopsy samples of erythema migrans lesions2. Later in the infection, PCR-based testing for B. burgdorferi DNA in synovial fluid is often positive in patients with Lyme arthritis before antibiotic therapy111, but is only positive in the CSF of a small number of patients with late Lyme neuroborreliosis. Because Borrelia DNA can persist after spirochaetal killing, PCR is not an accurate test for active infection111.

Thus, in both the United States and Europe, serological testing is the only practical and readily available method to support a diagnosis of Lyme borreliosis. In the United States, diagnosis is usually based on recognition of characteristic clinical features along with the detection of antibodies to B. burgdorferi, determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and western blotting. BOX 1 summarizes the recommended approaches for serological testing for B. burgdorferi s.l. and the pitfalls to be avoided. In the United States, western blots should be interpreted according to the criteria of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention112,113 (BOX 1). However, these criteria cannot be used in Europe, as no single set of interpretive criteria provides results with high sensitivity and specificity in all countries, owing to the presence of different genospecies of bacteria114. In a multicentre study to develop criteria for Europe, each laboratory identified eight bands for use in diagnosis, but no single set of criteria could be formulated114.