You can't get very far in JavaScript without dealing with objects. They're foundational to almost every aspect of the JavaScript programming language. In fact, learning how to create objects is probably one of the first things you studied when you were starting out. With that said, in order to most effectively learn about prototypes in JavaScript, we're going to channel our inner Jr. developer and go back to the basics.

Objects are key/value pairs. The most common way to create an object is with curly braces {} and you add properties and methods to an object using dot notation.

Simple. Now odds are in our application we'll need to create more than one animal. Naturally the next step for this would be to encapsulate that logic inside of a function that we can invoke whenever we needed to create a new animal. We'll call this pattern Functional Instantiation and we'll call the function itself a "constructor function" since it's responsible for "constructing" a new object.
Now whenever we want to create a new animal (or more broadly speaking a new "instance"), all we have to do is invoke our Animal function, passing it the animal's name and energy level. This works great and it's incredibly simple. However, can you spot any weaknesses with this pattern? The biggest and the one we'll attempt to solve has to do with the three methods - eat, sleep, and play. Each of those methods are not only dynamic, but they're also completely generic. What that means is that there's no reason to re-create those methods as we're currently doing whenever we create a new animal. We're just wasting memory and making each animal object bigger than it needs to be. Can you think of a solution? What if instead of re-creating those methods every time we create a new animal, we move them to their own object then we can have each animal reference that object? We can call this pattern Functional Instantiation with Shared Methods, wordy but descriptive?
By moving the shared methods to their own object and referencing that object inside of our Animal function, we've now solved the problem of memory waste and overly large animal objects.
Object.create
Let's improve our example once again by using Object.create. Simply put, Object.create allows you to create an object which will delegate to another object on failed lookups. Put differently, Object.create allows you to create an object and whenever there's a failed property lookup on that object, it can consult another object to see if that other object has the property. That was a lot of words. Let's see some code.
So in the example above, because child was created with Object.create(parent), whenever there's a failed property lookup on child, JavaScript will delegate that lookup to the parent object. What that means is that even though child doesn't have a heritage property, parent does so when you log child.heritage you'll get the parent's heritage which was Irish.

Now with Object.create in our tool shed, how can we use it in order to simplify our Animal code from earlier? Well, instead of adding all the shared methods to the animal one by one like we're doing now, we can use Object.create to delegate to the animalMethods object instead. To sound really smart, let's call this one Functional Instantiation with Shared Methods and Object.create?
So now when we call leo.eat, JavaScript will look for the eat method on the leo object. That lookup will fail, then, because of Object.create, it'll delegate to the animalMethods object which is where it'll find eat.

So far, so good. There are still some improvements we can make though. It seems just a tad "hacky" to have to manage a separate object (animalMethods) in order to share methods across instances. That seems like a common feature that you'd want to be implemented into the language itself. Turns out it is and it's the whole reason you're here - prototype.
So what exactly is prototype in JavaScript? Well, simply put, every function in JavaScript has a prototype property that references an object. Anticlimactic, right? Test it out for yourself.